# Notes 02 11 2022

## Denial of Service

### Definition
Attack that prevents the use of a service, usually by exhausting the resources of the system or damaging crucial components.

#### Classic kinds of Attack
 * Flooding (SYN flooding, PING flooding, etc.)
 * Source Address Spoofing: sending packets with a fake source address
     * The IP address is modified by using tools or changing the OS settings.
     * **SYN spoofing** &rarr; Sending a lot of TCP SYN packets to a server, so that he cannot respond to other requests.
     The source ip is spoofed, so the responses are sent to other nodes (who will ignore the requests, since they didn't send any TCP SYN packet).
     * **ICMP flooding** &rarr; Ping flooding, ECHO flooding
     * **UDP flooding** &rarr; Random ports are occupied on the same machine.
 * **DDoS** &rarr; Distributed Denial of Service, multiple systems are coordinated to flood a target. Usually this is achieved by implementing **botnets**, machines infected with backdoor programs. This allows the attacker to have an higher volume of traffic.


### Mitigations
 * **Prevention**:
     * A good practice is to check the source addresses of the LAN, in order to revent IP spoofing.
      * Cookies &arr; save the session information in cookies, so that it's harder to occupy the server's memory, since the cookies are stored in the users' machines.
      * Limit the traffic from a single source.
      * Block IP broadcasts.
      * Ask the user to solve a puzzle, in order to make him spend some time.
      * Use mirroring.
 * **Detection & Filtering**:
     * Have a good incident response plan.
     * Impose traffic filtering upstream.
     * Traffic Analysis, detect abnormal traffic patterns.
     * Intrusion Detection Systems.
 * **Source traceback and identification**:
     * Keep contact with the ISP, in order to have more information about the traffic and to traceback the source of the attack.

### Reflection Attacks
 * This attack exploit the normal behaviour of a protocol, achiving the DoS.
 * Example:
     * SYN sent to a legitimate network nodes, but the source address is spoofed.
     * The nodes send the SYN ACK to the target of the attacker.
     * The target is flooded with SYN ACK packets.

### Amplification
 * This attack exploit the normal behaviour of the protocol, amplifing the attack.
 * Example (**DNS Amplification**):
     * DNS requests are sent to a DNS server, with spoofed IP source address
     * DNS responses are all sent to the same target, and flooding it.
### DOS Attacks

#### Ping of Death
 * The ping protocol did not check the dimension of the packet in older OSs, so sending a PING packet with a size higher than *65000* bytes, and resulting in a buffer overflow.

#### Smurf Attacks
 * An echo packet is sent to a router with broadcast capabilities.
 * Each node that receives the packets respondes to the same (spoofed) source address.
 * The target is flooded by ECHO responses

#### Fraggle attack
 * Similar to the Smurf attack, but achieved by using the UDP protocol.

#### Teardrop Attack
 * Exploits TCP fragmentation and reassembly operations.

 
