# Cybersecurity Principles and Practices - Introduction

## Notes taken on 18th and 19th October 2022

## Concept of security
A system is **secure** when it respects the *CIA triade*:
 * Confidentiality
 * Integrity
 * Authentication

There are also other features: availabilty, ...

The goal is *preserving those properties* of *the data and services provided*.

## Types of attackers
Basing on the provenience:
* **Insiders** are the attackers *inside the security domain*. They are responsible for most of the attacks.
* **Outsiders** are threats that come from *outside the security domain*.

Basing on the kind of activity:
* **Passive** attackers are attackers that can only read information (spoofing).
* **Active** attackers can interact with the information.

## Terminology
Chapter 1 of the book "Computer Security
Principles and Practice".

 * **Asset** or **System Resource**
 * **Threat**
 * **Risk** is the probability of a threat to happen.
 * **Countermeasure** are means used to deal with threats. They may *prevent, detect or recover* from an attack.
 * **Vulnerability**

## User Authentication
Two phases:
 * Identification --> Specify the identifier
 * Verification --> Bind the identity to the identifier

Four ways to authenticate (something you):
 * know (password)
 * are (static biometrics, es. fingerprint)
 * possess (key, smartcard)
 * do (dynamic biometrics, es. voice)

This methods can be combined.
All this methods have issues.
 * Lunchtime attack --> Exploit the missed "de-authentication" of the user.

## Passord Authentication
 * The tuple **(username, password)** identifies the user.
 * The password must be conserved by the user and it must not publish it.

### Possible attacks
 * dictionary attack
     * Try each variants of a determined set of words.
     * Rainbow table attacks --> pre-compute a an enormous amount of hashes, then search the hash in the table, might be easier.
 * workstation hijacking
 * multiple use of the same password
 * use of a popular password
 * specific account attack (using password that the user probably uses)

### Countermeasures
  * Don't store the password in cleartext
      * Password are stored as hashes' digest (preferrably salted hashes)
  * Intrusion Detection
  * Training and enforcements of the policies
  * Automatic logout
  * Encrypted network links
  * Password checking
      * *reactive*
      * *proactive*
          * **Bloom filter** --> **Search**
          * **Markov model** --> if a Markov Model can guess a password, then it's not good enough

## Biometric Authentication
Authenthicate a user basing on his physical characteristics.

### Possible interactions
 * Enrollment:
    * Input
    * Feature extraction
    * Storage


 * Verification:
    * Input
    * Feature extraction
    * Comparison with the stored data about the user
    * Output True/False


 * Identification:
    * Input
    * Feature extraction
    * Comparison with the stored data about all the users
    * Output True/False

### Problems of biometrics
 * The templates are never the same, because of the nature of the human body and the state of the interface.
 * **Accuracy**: False match and false non-match.
