# Notes 26 10 22

## Database security

### Database Access Control
 * The database assumes that is used by a  logged user.
 * To each user a role is assigned.
 * Each role as a set of allowed actions to defined objects(**Role-based Access Control**).

### SQL Access Control
 * SQL implements two commands to manage access rights: ```GRANT``` and ```REVOKE```.
     * ```GRANT``` ```{ privileges | role } [ON table] TO``` ```{ user | role | PUBLIC } [IDENTIFIED BY password] [WITH GRANT OPTION]```
     * ```REVOKE``` ```{ privileges | role } [ON table] FROM { user | role | PUBLIC }```
 * SQL allows to **delegate** access rights (see the ```GRANT``` command).
 * It's possible to represent the database authorization status with a graph

### Inference
#### Definition
**Inference** is the **process of obtaining information from a DB, that are not supposed to be retrieved, using information that can be retrieved**.

#### Countermeasures
There are two main countermeasures:
 * Inference detection at *database design*
 * Inference detection at *query time*

### Statistical databases
 * Statistical databases are databases that collect data of *statistical nature*
 * They mat be of two types:
     * Pure statistical databases
     * Databases with statistical Access
 * The goal is to allow its statistical use, but without revealing its entries

### Protecting against Inference attacks
 * Restricting the set of allowed queries -> There must be some sort of detection algorithm.
 * Data perturbation ->
     * Conserve a copy of the real database (the *perturbated db*) on which the users can access.
     * Adding noise to the statistics, but conserving certain properties (distribution, excepted values, ecc.).
     * Swapping entries' data.
 * Output perturbation -> The query is recognized as malicious and its output.
 * Partitioning the database
 * Encrypting sensitive data
 * “n items over k percent” rule -> do not respond if n items represents over k% of the result


### Tracker attacks
 * It may be possible to access data by executing multiple allowed queries

## Other kinds of attacks
 * **Direct Attack**: aggregate computed over a small sample so individual data items leaked.
 * **Indirect Attack**: combines several aggregates -> If aggregate statistics refer to a small number of entries, it's possible to retrieve information about single entries.
 * **Tracker Attack**: type of indirect attack (very effective) -> Using set theory in order to retrieve information.
 * **Linear System Vulnerability**: takes tracker attacks further, using algebraic relations between query sets to construct equations yielding desired information.
