# Notes 25 10 22

## Access control

### Definition
Prevention of the anauthorized use of a resource, including the use of a resource in an unauthorized manner.

### Elements of Access control
 * Subject -> the entity that can access objects
     * usually a process, that represents a user or an application
 * Object -> the access controlled resource
 * Access Rights -> Rules of Access

### Access Control structures
 * Matrix -> rows are users, columns are resources. Each cell contains [Read | Write | Execute | Own]
 * Access Control List -> list of couples (objects, users that can access it)
 * Capabilities list -> list of couples (users, accesible objects)

## Different kinds of Access Control
What follows is a description of the different kinds of access control.

It may happen that those categories overlap.

Usually, the **Minimum Privilege Principle** is applied. Each user is given the lowest level of access possible.

### MAC (Mandatory Access Control)
Access Control rules are applied to everyone.

### DAC (Discretionary Access Control)
Access Control rules are applied only to certain subjects. Rights might be delegated.

### RB-AC (Role Based Access Control)
Each subject has a defined role, and that has some access rules associated to certain objects.
This is achieved by using two tables:
 * One table defines the roles of the users
 * Another table defines the resources that each role can access.

## Protection Domains
A **Protection Domain** is a set of objects associated with a set of access rights.

## UNIX case study

### sudo
 * "superuser do"
 * Execute a command as another user
 * Usually that's *root*, but you can impersonate any user registered in the ```/etc/sudoers``` file
 * It is necessary to know the **impersonated user's password**.

### How to read linux permissions
 * Permissions of each file are expressed as a string of 9 chars.
 * There is also a prefixed char, that is associated to the filetype.
 * The first three are the permissions of the user
 * The second three are the permissions of the group
 * The last three are the permissions of the other users
 * Each group has the letter that corresponds to the allowed authorization:
     * ```r``` means "read".
     * ```w``` means "write".
     * ```x``` means "execute".
     * ```-``` means that the action is not allowed.

### How to change a file Permissions
 * The ```chmod``` command allows the ```root``` and the owner of the file to change its Permissions
 * The syntax is ```chmod _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  filename```, where the string contains the authorizations, expressed as a number in base eight.
 * There are also other parameters that can be used, see ```man chmod``` for more information.

 ### Special Permissions
  * Special permissions can be given to users to allow them to act with the privileges of other users.
  * It is showed as an ```s``` in the permissions string.
  * Set ```uid``` -> The user is given special permissions
  * Set ```gid``` -> The group is given special permissions

 ### Sticky bit
  * Used for performance reasons
  * A bit dedicated in a folder (a folder is essentially a file).
  * Appears at the end of the permissions string as the char ```t```.
  * Allows *other users* to *read/write* files in a folder, but allows only the **owner** to **delete/rename** the file.

 ### Discretionary Access Control
  * Linux does not have a centralized access control schema
  * The owner of a resource grants permissions on that resource to the other subjects, if he wants.
  * While it has *extreme granularity and flexibility*, it *does not grant good performances*.
